Editorial review: Document Wasm bulk memory operations (#44296)
mdn/content: files/en-us/webassembly/reference/definitions/memory/index.md

---
title: "memory: Wasm definition"
short-title: memory
slug: WebAssembly/Reference/Definitions/memory
page-type: webassembly-instruction
browser-compat: webassembly.definitions.memory
sidebar: webassemblysidebar
---

The **`memory`** [definition](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/Definitions) declares a block of linear memory in units of 64KB pages.

{{InteractiveExample("Wat Demo: memory", "tabbed-taller")}}

```wat interactive-example
(module
  (import "console" "log" (func $log (param i32)))
  (memory $my_mem 1 2) ;; start with one memory page, and max of 2 pages
  (func $main

    ;; grow memory by 1 page
    ;; grow returns in 1 for success and -1 for failure
    ;; will fail if you grow to more than 2 pages
    (memory.grow $my_mem (i32.const 1))
    call $log ;; log the result

  )
  (start $main)
)
```

```js interactive-example
const url = "{%wasm-url%}";
await WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming(fetch(url), { console });
```

## Syntax

```plain

> memory name min max

Reviewer: The memory64 proposal is now [widely available](https://webassembly.org/features/?categories=browsers), so we should also document that you can choose whether you want 32-bit or 64-bit pointers for your memory.

The text format for this looks like so:

```
(memory $id? i32 <min> <max>?)
(memory $id? i64 <min> <max>?)
```

If `i32`/`i64` is omitted, `i32` is the default.

If you choose `i64`, then memory addresses are `i64`. For example:

```wat
(module
  (memory i64 1 1)
  (func
    i64.const 10     ;; store at address 10 in memory, note that it is an i64 instead of an i32
    f32.const 3.14   ;; value to be stored
    f32.store
  )
)
```

Note that memory64 has [some downsides](https://spidermonkey.dev/blog/2025/01/15/is-memory64-actually-worth-using.html).

Author: Ah, there's more ;-)

I've added a definition to the `memory` page. A couple of follow-up questions:

1. The [proposal](https://github.com/WebAssembly/memory64/blob/main/proposals/memory64/Overview.md) says this is relevant to table too. Do I need to add similar to the `table` definition?
2. This also looks like anywhere an offset immediate is used, I need to note that it will be an `i32` or an `i64`, depending on what address type the memory was defined with?
3. Is there anything else I would need to worry about with this proposal?

I think I'll probably tackle this proposal as a separate PR, beyond the `memory` and `table` updates, if that works for you.

Author: Update: I see you've made a bunch more comments about this below. I think I'll make all those changes in this PR, and then we can have a look at what other changes might be required.

```

- `memory`
  - : The `memory` definition type. Must always be included first.
- `name` {{optional_inline}}

>   - : An optional identifying name for the memory. This must begin with a `$` symbol, for example `$my_mem`. If this is omitted, the `memory` can be identified (for example when calling `memory.grow`) by its index, for example `0` for the first `memory` in the wasm script, `1` for the second, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : An optional identifying name for the memory. This must begin with a `$` symbol, for example `$my_mem`. If this is omitted, the `memory` can be identified (for example when calling `memory.grow`) by its index, for example `0` for the first `memory` in the Wasm module, `1` for the second, etc.
```

Author: updated

- `min`
  - : The minimum number of 64KB pages in the `memory`, which is also the initial number of pages.
- `max` {{optional_inline}}
  - : The maximum number of 64KB pages in the `memory`.

## Description

> WebAssembly memories provide a mechanism for Wasm modules to store and process strings and other non-numeric data types. The `memory` definition itself initializes the data store, while [`data`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/Definitions/data) definitions are used to define data to be stored in the memory. For example:

Reviewer: This is a very odd way to describe memory. Would you say that the RAM on your computer exists so that you can "store and process strings and other non-numeric data types"?

```suggestion
WebAssembly memories provide raw working memory for Wasm modules. The `memory` definition itself declares the data store, while [`data`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/Definitions/data) definitions can be used to initialize a memory with data. For example:
```

Author: Fair ;-)

I've updated this to use your suggestion.

```wat
(module
  (memory $my_mem 1 2)
  (data $greeting (i32.const 0) "Hello world")
  ;; ...
)
```

> Each `memory` is defined as a number of "pages", each one 64KB in size. After the optional identifying name, the two number values define the minimum (and initial) number of pages, and the maximum number of pages the memory can contain. A Wasm module can contain multiple memories, which each one identifiable by its identifying name, or by its index in the module (`0` for the first `memory` in the wasm script, `1` for the second, etc.)

Reviewer: I think it's worth clarifying that we mean 65536 bytes, or 2^16 bytes, because "64KB" is a bit ambiguous. In common parlance it would mean "64,000 bytes", but really the page size is 64KiB (kibibytes), based on powers of two instead of powers of 10.

I don't know what MDN's policy is for kilobytes (KB) vs. kibibytes (KiB), but regardless I think you can dodge the question by just listing the number of bytes.

```suggestion
Each `memory` is defined as a number of "pages", each one 64KB (65,536 bytes) in size. After the optional identifying name, the two number values define the minimum (and initial) number of pages, and the maximum number of pages the memory can contain. A Wasm module can contain multiple memories, each identifiable by name or index.
```

Author: I'm happy to use KiB, and I think we need to; there are a few places where we say `KB`, which would be better as `KiB`. We've definitely used it elsewhere on MDN. I've used it, and also specified the number of bytes in parens. I also used the rest of your suggestion at the end of the sentence.

Once a `memory` has been created, there are several [memory instructions](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/Memory) available for manipulating it. You can find more details about using Wasm memories in [WebAssembly memory](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Guides/Understanding_the_text_format#webassembly_memory).

### Manipulating Wasm memories from JavaScript

WebAssembly memories can be exported from a Wasm module:

```wat
(module
  (memory (export "memory") 1)
  (data $greeting (i32.const 0) "Hello world")
  ;; ...
)
```

Over in the JavaScript host, they are then available in the relevant [`exports`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/JavaScript_interface/Instance/exports) object, for example:

```js
WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming(fetch("module.wasm")).then((result) => {
  const mem = result.instance.exports.memory;
  // ...
});
```

> The memory is represented by a JavaScript [`WebAssembly.Memory`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/JavaScript_interface/Memory) object instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The memory is represented by a JavaScript [`WebAssembly.Memory`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/JavaScript_interface/Memory) object instance, which can be viewed and modified using [typed array objects](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/TypedArray) or [`DataView` objects](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/DataView).
```

This would probably be worth having an example of somewhere. Using a `Uint8Array` or `DataView` to access Wasm memory from JS is extremely common.

Author: I've used your wording suggestion, and also included a link to the `memory.init` reference page, which shows an example of just that.

    - [`i32`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/Value_types/i32)
      - : Data will be stored at 32-bit addresses. Pointers used to identify memory addresses (for example when [storing](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/Memory/store) or [loading](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/Memory/load)) will be `i32` values.
    - [`i64`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/Value_types/i64)
      - : Data will be stored at 64-bit addresses. Pointers used to identify memory addresses (for example when storing or loading) will be `i64` values.

    If omitted, `address_type` defaults to `i32`.

- `min`
  - : The minimum number of 64KiB pages in the `memory`, which is also the initial number of pages.
- `max` {{optional_inline}}
  - : The maximum number of 64KiB pages in the `memory`.

## Description

WebAssembly memories provide raw working memory for Wasm modules. The `memory` definition itself declares the data store, while [`data`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/Definitions/data) definitions can be used to initialize a memory with data. For example:

```wat
(module
  (memory $my_mem 1 2)

>   (data $greeting (i32.const 0) "Hello world")

Reviewer 2: This is confusing, because at this point you don't know that the data is by default written to memory 0 in the module. Also why name something you won't use. Might be better to show it explicitly

```suggestion
  (data $greeting (memory $my_mem) (i32.const 0) "Hello world")
```

Reviewer 2: Note, you might reasonably then show the short form afterwards and explain it. Then you could omit it for future examples.

Author: This is a good point. I've rewritten it to the following:

---

```wat
(module
  (memory $my_mem 1 2)
  (data $greeting (memory $my_mem) (i32.const 0) "Hello world")
  ;; ...
)
```

Each `memory` is defined as a number of "pages", each one 64KiB (65,536 bytes) in size. After the optional identifying memory name, the two number values define the minimum (and initial) number of pages, and the maximum number of pages the memory can contain. The `data` definition is also named, and specifies an identifier for the memory to store the data in. A Wasm module can contain multiple memories, each identifiable by name or index.

If you only have one memory in your module, or you want to store the data in the first memory in the module, you can omit the memory name and identifier, like so:

```wat
(module
  (memory 1 2)
  (data $greeting (i32.const 0) "Hello world")
  ;; ...
)
```

By default, the data is written to memory 0.

### Manipulating Wasm memories from JavaScript

WebAssembly memories can be exported from a Wasm module:

```wat
(module
  (memory (export "memory") 1)
  (data $greeting (i32.const 0) "Hello world")
  ;; ...
)
```

Over in the JavaScript host, they are then available in the relevant [`exports`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/JavaScript_interface/Instance/exports) object, for example:

```js
WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming(fetch("module.wasm")).then((result) => {
  const mem = result.instance.exports.memory;
  // ...
});
```

The memory is represented by a JavaScript [`WebAssembly.Memory`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/JavaScript_interface/Memory) object instance, which can be viewed and modified using [typed array objects](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/TypedArray) or [`DataView` objects](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/DataView). See [`memory.init`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/Memory/init) for an example.

You can also create a new `memory` using the JavaScript [`WebAssembly.Memory()`](/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Reference/JavaScript_interface/Memory/Memory) constructor and import it into a Wasm module.

## Specifications

> {{Specifications}}

Reviewer 2: At least this one is not found. Assuming this just hasn't updated yet. Won't check any others for spec/compat.

Author: Yeah, I only added these ones very recently.
